Amplicon Sequence Analysis Tools
https://github.com/padbr/asat

INTRODUCTION
------------
The purpose of this repository is primarily to document custom scripts that I
use during analysis of amplicon sequencing datasets, when preparing peer
reviewed manuscripts for publication. My datasets will probably primarily be
microbial community analyses, using primers targeting hypervariable regions of
the 16S rRNA gene for prokaryotic community analyses and ITS for fungal
community analyses, sequenced using Illumina's MiSeq or iSeq platforms.

This repository isn't intended to develop nor present a complete pipeline for
performing amplicon data analysis. It is just to document the use of custom
scripts within such pipelines as necessasry for citation in peer-reviewed
publications. That said, if you find any script presented here useful, you are
of course free to use it according to the terms of the GNU General Public
License v3 (see LICENCE at https://github.com/padbr/asat).


REQUIREMENTS
------------
Operating system: Linux
    I typically use a 64-bit linux machine. In theory python scripts can work in
    other operating systems such as Windows or OSX. However, I have taken no
    precautions to ensure that my code does run on such platforms.

Hardware: very modest hardware should suffice
    This will depend a lot on the size of the datasets being analyzed and
    whether or not I have written a given script in such a way as to avoid
    loading all sequencing reads into memory at once. Typically, I do not go to
    the trouble of parallelizing my scripts.
    Probably, a machine with 8 GB of RAM and enough free disk space to handle
    the sometimes large high-throughput sequencing datasets should suffice.

Software:
    Python 3.X
    I write primarily in python, using version 3.X. The libraries
    required for my scripts will vary from script to script, but I regularly use
    biopython, matplotlib, numpy and scipy. These libraries can easily be
    installed with pip or through various linux distributions' package managers.

INSTALL
-------
No particular installation is required, but it is much more convenient if the
stand-alone python scripts are placed somewhere referenced by the PATH
environment variable.

OVERVIEW OF SCRIPTS (usage instructions are detailed within each script)
-------------------
strip_degen_primer.py
    Typically, amplicon sequencing datasets contain the primer sequences at the
    starts of the R1 and R2 reads. As these sequences are artifactual it is
    desirable to remove them. That is the purpose of this script. It takes as
    mandatory arguments, (degenerate) primer sequences and R1 and R2 read files
    (it only works on paired reads only). It assumes that the reads are
    directional (i.e. that R1 should have the forward primer and R2 should have
    the reverse primer). It allows for mismatches to the degenerate primers.
    If no discernable primer sequence is found in either or both of the R1 and
    R2 reads, the read pair will be discarded. The output files will contain the
    paired reads, in separate R1 and R2 files. The matched primer sequences will
    be stripped from the reads in the output files, while the read names will be
    kept as they were.
    I would like to point out that some people advocate keeping at least a part
    of the primer sequences. The reasoning is that it helps to anchor the ends
    of an alignment which would be used to make a tree for β-analysis. I would
    argue that primers are artifactual and should be removed as mismatched
    amplification is definitely possible. However, especially given that PCR is
    much more sensitive to mismatches near the 3' end of the primers, I think
    that it is okay to make the compromise advocated by many and keep the last
    five nucleotides of the primers (especially if they are not degenerate
    positions) in order to anchor an alignment. This is not supported in this
    script, but I just feel like mentioning this point for balance and to allow
    the reader to best consider if this script is suitable for their needs.

strip_degen_primer_deep.py
    This is very similar to strip_degen_primer.py with the exception that it
    provides an option to search into the reads for a match to a primer. This
    is to account for the fact that some non-Illumina amplicon reads (e.g.
    Nanopore) do not have the primers immediately at the start of the read.
    If running this, note that the depth option should not be more than half
    of the length of the shortest read in the data. It may be advisable to
    filter out reads below a certain length before running this in order to
    avoid an error.

benjamini_hochberg_p_adjust.py
    Two methods: The first is a means of transforming a list of p-values into
    a corresponding list of false-positive corrected adjusted p-values, using
    the Benjamini-Hochberg method. The input and output orders are the same.
    The second method also performs a Benjamini-Hochberg transformation, but
    it also handles `nan' (not a number) values. Again, input and output order
    will correspond.

expected_intransience.poisson.py
    The primary purpose of this is to assess whether features observed in
    feature tables are present. It is specifically tailored to repeated
    samples of individuals where one sample is taken before a treamtment
    and three or four samples are taken after treatment. In "noisy"
    feature tables, the appearence and disappearence of features over the
    course of a set of related samples isn't necessarily indicative of the
    feature being present and absent, especially when the features'
    abundances are low with respect to the sampling depth. Thus, this
    script assess the likelihood of observing a feature assuming an approx.
    relative abundance. It also assess whether the feature is continuously
    present or absent in the three or four after treatment samples and uses
    a routine to calculate a gain or a loss score for each feature in each
    individual. This script is very particular to the data associated with
    a manuscript in preparation for publication. It has not been written
    in such a way that it would be easily re-used - especially by somebody
    not very familiar with writing python scripts.
TO DO
-----

